---
title: "Chapter 18: Host and Application Security"
date: 2023-07-25 17:00:00 +500
categories: [Security+, Part III]
tags: []    # TAG names should always be lowercase
---
<script>
// Get the container element that holds the post content
var containerElement = document.getElementById('containerElementId');

// Function to save the reading position based on the scroll
function saveReadingPosition() {
  localStorage.setItem('readingPosition', containerElement.scrollTop);
}

// Event listener to update the reading position on scroll
containerElement.addEventListener('scroll', saveReadingPosition);

// Get the saved reading position from local storage
var savedPosition = localStorage.getItem('readingPosition');

// Scroll to the saved reading position
if (savedPosition) {
  containerElement.scrollTop = savedPosition;
}
</script>

<style>
  p {
    text-align: justify;
  }
  #myParagraph {
  display: none;
  pointer-events: none;
}
  </style>

# Part III Implementation
# Chapter 18: Host and Application Security



## Endpoint Protection

### Antivirus
Antivirus software is designed to detect, prevent, and remove malicious software, often referred to as viruses, from computer systems and devices. It scans files, programs, and data to identify patterns or behaviors associated with known threats. Antivirus solutions help safeguard endpoints from a range of malicious software, including viruses, worms, Trojans, and more.

### Anti-Malware
Anti-malware software extends protection beyond viruses to include a broader spectrum of malicious software, or malware. This includes threats like spyware (which spies on user activities), adware (which displays unwanted ads), and various types of Trojans (which disguise themselves as legitimate software). Anti-malware tools provide comprehensive defense against a wider array of digital threats.

### Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR)
EDR solutions are advanced security tools that monitor endpoints (such as computers and devices) for suspicious activities and potential threats. They analyze events in real-time, detecting unusual behaviors and patterns that may indicate a cyberattack or compromise. EDR systems offer insights into the scope and impact of incidents, facilitating effective incident response and threat mitigation.

### DLP
Data Loss Prevention (DLP) solutions focus on safeguarding sensitive information from unauthorized access, sharing, or leakage. These tools monitor data flows and communications to prevent confidential data from being transferred to unauthorized users or locations. DLP can be particularly crucial for protecting sensitive corporate, customer, or personal information.

### Next-Generation Firewall (NGFW)
Next-Generation Firewalls (NGFWs) are advanced firewall systems that go beyond traditional firewall functionalities. They offer intrusion prevention, application awareness, and deep packet inspection capabilities. NGFWs analyze network traffic at a more granular level, enabling them to identify and block not only known threats but also new and sophisticated attack methods.

### Host-based Intrusion Detection System (HIDS)
HIDS monitors the activities on a single host (such as a computer or server) for signs of unauthorized or malicious behavior. It analyzes system logs, files, and other relevant data to identify anomalies or suspicious patterns that could indicate a security breach. HIDS serves as an important layer of defense for individual endpoints.

### Host-based Intrusion Prevention System (HIPS)
HIPS builds on HIDS capabilities by not only detecting but also actively preventing unauthorized activities on a host. It takes immediate actions to block or restrict activities that match predefined security rules. HIPS enhances security by intervening in real-time to halt potentially harmful actions.

### Host-based Firewall
A host-based firewall is a software-based firewall that resides on an individual device or endpoint. It monitors incoming and outgoing network traffic to determine which communications are allowed and which are blocked. This provides an added layer of defense by controlling the network connections specific to that device.

## Boot Integrity

### Boot Security/Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI)
UEFI, or Unified Extensible Firmware Interface, is a modern replacement for BIOS (Basic Input/Output System). UEFI provides enhanced security during the boot process by supporting secure boot mechanisms. Secure boot ensures that the system boots using only authorized and digitally signed components, helping prevent malware or unauthorized code from executing during startup.

### Measured Boot
Measured Boot is a security feature that records the integrity measurements of various boot components. These measurements are stored in a secure log, allowing later verification of the boot process's trustworthiness. Measured Boot helps identify changes or compromises to the boot sequence that could indicate unauthorized alterations.

### Boot Attestation
Boot attestation involves verifying and attesting to the integrity of the boot process. This process ensures that the system starts securely and has not been tampered with. Boot attestation generates a trusted report or evidence that the boot process followed security protocols and used authorized components.

## Database

### Tokenization
Tokenization is a method for protecting sensitive data by replacing it with unique tokens. These tokens serve as placeholders for the actual data. Tokenization allows systems to process transactions and operations using the tokens while keeping the original sensitive information secure. It is commonly used for payment card data and other sensitive information.

### Salting
Salting is a security practice used in password storage. When storing passwords, a random value (the salt) is added to each password before hashing. This randomization prevents attackers from using precomputed tables (rainbow tables) to quickly crack passwords, as each salted password generates a unique hash.

### Hashing
Hashing is a process that transforms input data, such as a password or a file, into a fixed-length string of characters. Hashing is a one-way function, meaning it is difficult to reverse and retrieve the original input from the hash value. Hashes are commonly used to ensure data integrity and to securely store passwords in databases. Even a small change in the input data results in a significantly different hash value.


## Application Security

### Input Validations
Input validations ensure that data entered by users is checked for correctness and safety. Validations prevent malicious inputs, such as SQL injection or cross-site scripting (XSS), from compromising the application.

### Secure Cookies
Secure cookies are used to enhance cookie security. The "Secure" attribute ensures cookies are transmitted only over encrypted (HTTPS) connections. The "HttpOnly" attribute restricts cookie access from client-side scripts, reducing the risk of attacks.

### Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Headers
HTTP headers convey additional information between clients and servers during web requests. Headers like Content Security Policy (CSP) define where resources can be loaded from, while Strict Transport Security (HSTS) enforces HTTPS usage, bolstering application security.

### Code Signing
Code signing involves digitally signing software using cryptographic techniques. This confirms the authenticity and integrity of the code's source. Code signing helps users trust that the code they're executing is genuine and hasn't been tampered with.

### Allow List
An allow list, also known as a whitelist, enumerates approved elements or actions. By permitting only known safe entities, it minimizes the potential entry points for malicious inputs or actions.

### Block List/Deny List
A block list, or deny list, identifies disallowed entities, actions, or inputs. It helps prevent known vulnerabilities or malicious inputs from being processed, reducing attack vectors.

### Secure Coding Practices
Secure coding practices guide developers in writing code that prioritizes security. By avoiding common vulnerabilities and adopting secure coding patterns, developers build applications that are less prone to exploitation.

### Static Code Analysis
Static code analysis tools review source code without execution, identifying vulnerabilities and code quality issues. These tools assist in finding problems early in the development cycle, enhancing security.

### Dynamic Code Analysis
Dynamic code analysis tools test applications during runtime, uncovering vulnerabilities that may only manifest while the software is operational.

### Fuzzing
Fuzzing involves systematically bombarding an application with unexpected, invalid, or random inputs. This helps identify vulnerabilities, crashes, or unexpected behavior that attackers could exploit.

## Hardening

### Open Ports and Services
Hardening involves limiting an application's attack surface by closing unnecessary network ports and disabling unused services. This reduces potential entry points for attackers.

### Registry
Registry hardening secures the Windows Registry by configuring permissions and settings. This prevents unauthorized changes that could expose the system to vulnerabilities.

### Disk Encryption
Disk encryption protects data at rest by encrypting the entire disk or specific partitions. Even if physical storage devices are compromised, the data remains confidential.

### OS
Operating system hardening configures the OS to minimize security risks. This includes applying security patches, disabling unused features, and implementing security controls.

### Patch Management
Patch management is the practice of regularly updating software to address known vulnerabilities and improve security.

### Third-Party Updates
Updating third-party software is essential to prevent vulnerabilities in components from being exploited by attackers.

### Auto-Update
Auto-update mechanisms ensure that software automatically receives security updates, reducing the risk of using outdated and vulnerable versions.

## Self-Encrypting Drive (SED)/Full Disk Encryption (FDE)

### Opal
Opal is a standard for self-encrypting drives (SEDs), providing a consistent method to manage and use hardware-based encryption for data protection.

## Hardware Root of Trust

A hardware root of trust establishes a secure foundation for a system using trusted hardware components. These components, like cryptographic modules or secure boot mechanisms, enhance system security.

## Trusted Platform Module (TPM)

TPM is a hardware-based security module that stores cryptographic keys, enabling secure authentication and providing a basis for secure system operations.

## Sandboxing

Sandboxing isolates applications or processes within a controlled environment, limiting the impact of malicious code by containing it from affecting the wider system or network.


## Chapter Review


## Chapter questions

<p id="myParagraph">[Link to a page]({% link assets/quiz.html %})</p>



<div style="display: flex; flex-direction: column; height: 60vh;">
  <iframe src="/assets/quiz.html?json=/assets/part3chapter18.json" style="flex: 1;"></iframe>
</div>
