---
title: "2.5 Cybersecurity Resilience"
date: 2023-08-08 17:00:00 +500
categories: [Security+, Part II]
tags: []    # TAG names should always be lowercase
---
<div style="text-align: justify;">

# 2.5 Cybersecurity Resilience

## Redundancy

In the context of "Cybersecurity Resilience," redundancy refers to the concept of having duplicate or backup components in a system to ensure its availability and continued operation in the face of failures, errors, or attacks.

In cybersecurity, redundancy is employed to enhance the resilience of critical systems, networks, or data against potential threats. By introducing redundancy, organizations can reduce the risk of a single point of failure that could disrupt normal operations or compromise security.



### Geographic Dispersal

Geographic dispersal, also known as geographic redundancy, is a strategy that involves spreading critical components, data, or resources across multiple geographically separated locations. This is done to ensure that if a cyber incident, natural disaster, or any other disruptive event affects one location, the services or operations can continue from another location unaffected.
For example, an organization might have redundant data centers in different regions or countries. If one data center experiences a cyber attack or a physical disaster, the redundant data center can take over seamlessly, minimizing downtime and ensuring business continuity.

### Disk

Disk redundancy, in the context of cybersecurity, refers to the practice of using redundant storage techniques to protect data against hardware failures. One of the most common methods of disk redundancy is RAID (Redundant Array of Independent Disks). RAID configurations distribute data across multiple disks, and depending on the RAID level used, it can offer fault tolerance, improved performance, or both.
If a disk in a RAID array fails due to hardware issues or cyber attacks, the data can still be accessed from the remaining disks, ensuring that critical information remains available.

### Network

Network redundancy involves implementing duplicate or alternative network paths and components to ensure network availability and reliability. Redundant network links, switches, and routers are used to create alternative communication routes.
In the event of a network component failure or a cyber attack affecting a part of the network, traffic can be rerouted through redundant paths, maintaining connectivity and preventing network downtime.

### Power

Power redundancy is about having backup power sources to keep critical systems and infrastructure operational during power outages or disruptions. In a cybersecurity context, power redundancy is essential to prevent attacks that attempt to disrupt systems by cutting off their power supply.
Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) systems are commonly used to provide immediate backup power when the main power source fails, allowing systems to shut down gracefully or continue running until power is restored.

Redundancy in these areas helps organizations maintain operational continuity and resilience, reducing the impact of cyber threats and other disruptive events. It is an essential component of a comprehensive cybersecurity strategy to protect against potential single points of failure and to ensure critical operations can continue even in challenging circumstances.

## Replication

refers to the process of creating and maintaining identical copies of data, systems, or services in multiple locations or environments. The purpose of replication is to ensure availability, fault tolerance, and data consistency, making it an important aspect of cybersecurity resilience.
nces even in challenging circumstances.

### Storage Area Network (SAN)
A Storage Area Network (SAN) is a specialized high-speed network that provides block-level access to storage devices such as disk arrays or storage servers. SANs are commonly used to centralize and manage storage resources, making them easily accessible to servers and applications.
In the context of replication and cybersecurity resilience, SANs play a crucial role in data replication. SAN-based replication allows organizations to create duplicate copies of data stored on SAN devices and maintain them in real-time or with minimal delay.

Advantages of using SAN-based replication for cybersecurity resilience include:

**Data Protection:** SAN replication ensures that critical data is continuously backed up to remote locations or disaster recovery sites, reducing the risk of data loss due to cyber attacks or hardware failures.

**High Availability:** In case of a primary SAN failure or a cyber incident affecting the primary SAN, the secondary SAN can take over seamlessly, providing uninterrupted access to data and applications.

**Disaster Recovery:** SAN replication is often used as a part of disaster recovery strategies. In the event of a major cyber incident or natural disaster, data can be restored from the replicated SAN to bring systems back online.

### VM

A Virtual Machine (VM) is a software emulation of a physical computer, allowing multiple operating systems and applications to run on a single physical machine. VMs provide isolation and encapsulation, enabling efficient utilization of hardware resources and easy deployment of applications.
Replication in the context of VMs involves creating identical copies of virtual machines and keeping them in sync with the primary VM. VM replication is commonly used for disaster recovery and high availability purposes in cybersecurity resilience:

**Disaster Recovery:** If the primary VM becomes inaccessible due to a cyber attack or system failure, the replicated VM can be activated to take over its role, ensuring continuity of services.

**High Availability:** By having redundant VMs running in different physical hosts or data centers, organizations can distribute workloads and ensure that services remain available even if one host or location experiences problems.

**Snapshots:** VM replication often involves creating snapshots, which are point-in-time copies of a VM's state. Snapshots can be used for backup purposes, enabling quick restoration of a VM to a specific point in time in case of data corruption or cyber incidents.



## On-premises vs. Cloud



## Backup Types

Backups are an essential aspect of data protection and disaster recovery strategies. Different backup types serve varying purposes, providing organizations with options to meet their specific needs. Here are some common backup types:


### Full

A full backup is a complete copy of all data and files in a system at a specific point in time. It captures everything, including files, folders, applications, and configurations. Full backups provide comprehensive data protection and serve as a baseline for other backup types.

### Incremental

An incremental backup captures only the data that has changed since the last backup, whether it was a full backup or another incremental backup. These backups are faster and require less storage space since they only include the changes made since the last backup.

### Snapshot


Snapshot backups are point-in-time copies of data that capture the state of a system at a specific moment. They provide a quick and efficient way to create backups by creating read-only images of the data without duplicating it entirely.

### Differential

Differential backups capture all the data that has changed since the last full backup. Unlike incremental backups, they do not rely on previous backups for restoration, making data restoration faster.

### Tape

Tape backup involves storing backup data on magnetic tape cartridges. Historically, tape backup has been popular for long-term data archival due to its relatively low cost and high capacity.

### Disk

Disk backup involves using hard disk drives or solid-state drives to store backup data. Disk backups offer fast backup and recovery times, making them suitable for short-term data protection.

### Copy

Copy backups are duplicates of the original data created separately from other backup types. They provide an additional layer of data protection without interfering with the regular backup schedule.

### Network Attached Storage (NAS)

NAS backup involves storing backup data on network-attached storage devices. NAS provides a centralized backup solution accessible to multiple devices on the network.

### Storage Area Network (SAN)

SAN backup utilizes a specialized high-speed network to provide block-level access to storage devices. SANs are often used to create redundant copies of data for backup and disaster recovery purposes.

### Cloud

Cloud backup involves storing backup data on remote cloud servers provided by third-party vendors. It offers offsite storage and easy scalability, making it popular for both personal and enterprise use.

### Image

An image backup captures an exact copy of an entire system, including the operating system, applications, and data. It allows for full system recovery in case of hardware failure or system corruption.

### Online vs. Offline

Online backup refers to backing up data while it is in active use and accessible to users. Offline backup involves copying data when it is not in use, such as during scheduled maintenance or when systems are shut down.

### Distance Considerations

Distance considerations refer to the geographical separation between the primary data and the backup location. It is important to have backups stored in a location far enough from the primary data to protect against regional disasters or physical damage. This distance can vary based on the organization's risk tolerance and disaster recovery strategy.

## Nonpersistence

Nonpersistence, also known as statelessness, is a concept in computing and software development where changes made to a system or application during its runtime are not preserved or persisted after the system is shut down or restarted. In other words, any modifications or data created during the current session are discarded, and the system returns to its original state or configuration when restarted.


### Revert to Known State

Reverting to a known state, also known as "reset to default" or "rollback," is a practice where a system or application is restored to a predefined state that is known to be stable and secure. This known state typically represents a clean and unaltered configuration that is considered safe and free from any issues.
In systems or applications that support nonpersistence, users have the option to initiate a reset, which eliminates any changes made during the current session and returns the system or application to its original state. This can be useful for undoing undesirable changes, reversing the effects of malware, or restoring the system to a known stable configuration.

### Last Known-Good Configuration

Last Known-Good Configuration is a feature primarily associated with the Windows operating system. It allows users to boot their computer using a previously saved configuration that is known to be functional and free from issues. Last Known-Good Configuration is useful when a recent system change or update has caused problems, and the user wants to revert to a state where the system was functioning correctly.
When a system fails to boot or experiences issues after a change, Windows attempts to automatically boot using the last known-good configuration to avoid the problem-causing change. If successful, the user can then investigate and resolve the issue that caused the initial problem.

### Live Boot Media

Live boot media refers to bootable media, such as a CD, DVD, USB flash drive, or external hard drive, that contains a complete operating system capable of running directly from the media without requiring installation on the computer's internal storage.
When a system is booted from live media, the operating system and applications run entirely in memory, and no changes are made to the internal storage. As a result, the session is nonpersistent, and any modifications made during the session are lost when the live media is removed, and the system is rebooted.

Live boot media is commonly used for purposes like:

**Troubleshooting and Diagnostics:** Users can boot from live media to diagnose and fix issues on their computers without affecting the installed operating system.

**Data Recovery:** Live media can be used to access and recover data from a computer with a malfunctioning or inaccessible operating system.

**Security and Privacy:** Live media can be used for secure and private browsing sessions, as no user data or browsing history is saved after the session.

**Penetration Testing:** Security professionals use live boot media with specialized security tools for penetration testing and vulnerability assessments.

## High Availability (HA)

High Availability is a design principle and set of practices in computing and system architecture aimed at ensuring a system or service remains continuously operational with minimal downtime. The goal of high availability is to maximize system uptime, providing users with uninterrupted access to critical applications and services. HA is crucial for systems that require constant availability to support mission-critical operations, such as e-commerce websites, financial services, healthcare systems, and communication networks.


### Scalability

Scalability is the ability of a system, application, or infrastructure to handle increasing demands, workload, or user growth effectively and efficiently. In other words, a scalable system is capable of expanding its resources and capacity to accommodate higher levels of traffic, data, or processing without compromising performance or user experience. Scalability is a fundamental characteristic sought after in modern computing systems, especially in the context of cloud computing, web applications, databases, and network infrastructures.

There are two main types of scalability:

1. **Vertical Scalability (Scaling Up):**
Vertical scalability involves increasing the resources of a single server or hardware component to handle greater workloads. This can include adding more powerful CPUs, increasing RAM, expanding storage, or upgrading other hardware specifications. Vertical scaling is typically limited to the physical constraints of the hardware and may become costly as more powerful components are required.

2. **Horizontal Scalability (Scaling Out):**
Horizontal scalability involves adding more instances or nodes to the system, distributing the workload across multiple servers or machines. This approach allows the system to handle increased demand by adding more resources in a cost-effective and flexible manner. Horizontal scaling can be achieved by load balancing techniques that distribute incoming requests among the multiple instances, ensuring a balanced workload.


## Restoration Order

Restoration order, also known as recovery order, refers to the sequence in which data, systems, or services are restored after a disruption or disaster. In the context of disaster recovery or backup strategies, the restoration order outlines the steps and priorities for bringing systems back to their normal operational state following an incident that caused data loss or system downtime.

The restoration order is determined based on the criticality and dependencies of various components within the IT infrastructure. It ensures that the most essential components are restored first to minimize the impact on business operations and user experience. The restoration process typically follows a predefined plan or set of procedures to streamline the recovery efforts.


## Diversity

### Technologies

In the technology domain, diversity refers to the use and adoption of a wide variety of technologies, tools, and platforms within an organization's IT infrastructure. Embracing technology diversity means not being overly reliant on a single technology or vendor for all aspects of the business. Instead, it involves utilizing a mix of technologies that best fit the organization's needs and goals.

### Vendors

Vendor diversity involves working with multiple suppliers or service providers to fulfill various business needs. Partnering with different vendors offers several benefits:

**Risk Mitigation:** Diversifying vendors reduces the risk associated with relying heavily on a single supplier.

**Competitive Bidding:** Engaging multiple vendors allows organizations to receive competitive bids, potentially leading to better pricing and service agreements.

**Innovation and Expertise:** Different vendors bring diverse expertise, perspectives, and innovative solutions to the table.

**Supplier Relationship Management:** Working with various vendors helps organizations develop better supplier relationship management skills.

### Crypto

In the context of cryptocurrencies, diversity refers to the existence of numerous digital currencies beyond the well-known Bitcoin. There are thousands of cryptocurrencies, each with its unique features, use cases, and underlying technology.
Advantages of cryptocurrency diversity include:

Choice and Use Case Suitability: Different cryptocurrencies cater to specific use cases, allowing users to select the most appropriate one for their needs.

Competition and Innovation: A diverse crypto landscape fosters competition and incentivizes innovation among developers and projects.

Risk Diversification: Diversifying investments across multiple cryptocurrencies can help spread investment risk.

### Controls

In the realm of cybersecurity and risk management, diversity in controls refers to the use of multiple security measures and strategies to protect an organization's assets and data. These controls may include technical, administrative, and physical safeguards.
Advantages of diverse controls include:

**Defense in Depth:** Layering different controls provides a more robust defense against cyber threats.

**Comprehensive Protection:** Diverse controls address various attack vectors, minimizing security gaps.

**Adaptability:** Using a mix of controls allows organizations to adapt to evolving threats and security challenges.

**Regulatory Compliance:** Implementing diverse controls aids in meeting compliance requirements and industry standards.

## Chapter Review



1. **Redundancy:** Having duplicate components or systems in place to provide backup or failover in case of a primary component's failure.

2. **Geographic Dispersal:** Spreading components or data across different physical locations to protect against regional failures or disasters.

3. **Disk:** A physical storage device, such as a hard disk drive (HDD) or solid-state drive (SSD), used to store data in a computer or server.

4. **Network:** A system of interconnected devices and computers that enables communication and data exchange.

5. **Power:** Electrical energy that powers and supplies electricity to devices and infrastructure.

6. **Replication:** Creating identical copies of data, applications, or systems for redundancy or backup purposes.

7. **Storage Area Network (SAN):** A high-speed network that provides block-level access to storage devices like disk arrays or storage servers.

8. **VM (Virtual Machine):** A software emulation of a physical computer that allows multiple operating systems and applications to run on a single machine.

9. **On-premises vs. Cloud:** Comparison of hosting IT infrastructure locally (on-premises) or using remote cloud services.

10. **Backup Types:** Different methods of creating data backups to protect against data loss.

11. **Full:** A complete backup of all data and files in a system at a specific point in time.

12. **Incremental:** Capturing only the data that has changed since the last backup.

13. **Snapshot:** A point-in-time copy of data used for backup or testing purposes.

14. **Differential:** Capturing all data changes since the last full backup.

15. **Tape:** Storing backup data on magnetic tape cartridges.

16. **Copy:** A duplicate of original data created separately from regular backups.

17. **Network Attached Storage (NAS):** Storing backup data on network-attached storage devices.

18. **Cloud:** Storing backup data on remote cloud servers provided by third-party vendors.

19. **Image:** An exact copy of an entire system, including the operating system and applications.

20. **Online vs. Offline:** Performing backups while systems are active (online) or shut down (offline).

21. **Distance Considerations:** Taking into account the geographical separation between primary and backup data locations.

22. **Nonpersistence:** Changes made to a system or application during its runtime are not preserved after shutdown or restart.

23. **Revert to Known State:** Restoring a system to a predefined stable configuration.

24. **Last Known-Good Configuration:** Booting a computer using a previously saved functional configuration.

25. **Live Boot Media:** Bootable media containing an operating system that runs without installation on a computer.

26. **High Availability:** Design principle to ensure continuous system operation and minimal downtime.

27. **Scalability:** A system's ability to handle increased workload or demand effectively.

28. **Restoration Order:** Sequence for restoring data and systems after a disruption or disaster.

29. **Diversity:** Inclusion of various individuals, perspectives, and cultures to create an inclusive environment.

30. **Technologies:** A wide variety of tools, platforms, and solutions used within an organization's IT infrastructure.

31. **Vendors:** Multiple suppliers or service providers engaged to fulfill different business needs.

32. **Crypto (Cryptocurrencies):** Diverse digital currencies beyond Bitcoin, each with unique features and uses.

33. **Controls:** Various security measures and strategies implemented to protect data and assets from cyber threats.


</div>
