---
title: "Surfer"
date: 2023-09-14 17:00:00 +500
categories: []
tags: [] 
---




**Introduction:**
Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF) is a potent web application vulnerability that allows attackers to send crafted requests from the server to internal resources. In this write-up, we explore a real-world SSRF scenario, detailing the steps taken to exploit it successfully.

**Initial Recon:**
Our journey begins with an initial Nmap port scan of the target server, revealing two open ports: SSH (22/tcp) and HTTP (80/tcp).

```shell
nmap -p- --open -n -v 10.10.89.36
PORT   STATE SERVICE
22/tcp open  ssh
80/tcp open  http
```

**Web Enumeration:**
Upon accessing the HTTP service, we find a login webpage. After some trial and error, we gain access using the default credentials "admin/admin." However, our path forward remains uncertain, so I decide to enumerate further.

**Gobuster Enumeration:**
We deploy Gobuster to explore potential hidden directories:

```shell
/assets               (Status: 301) [Size: 311] [--> http://10.10.89.36/assets/]
/backup               (Status: 301) [Size: 311] [--> http://10.10.89.36/backup/]
/index.php            (Status: 302) [Size: 0] [--> /login.php]
/internal             (Status: 301) [Size: 313] [--> http://10.10.89.36/internal/]
/robots.txt           (Status: 200) [Size: 40]
/server-status        (Status: 403) [Size: 276]
/vendor               (Status: 301) [Size: 311] [--> http://10.10.89.36/vendor/]
```

Despite not gaining access to most directories, we discover a crucial hint within the `robots.txt` file:

```shell
User-Agent: *
Disallow: /backup/chat.txt
```

**Password Hint:**
Upon investigating `/backup/chat.txt`, we find a conversation hinting at the need to change credentials and revealing the existence of an internal server:

```plaintext
Admin: I have finished setting up the new export2pdf tool.
Kate: Thanks, we will require daily system reports in pdf format.
Admin: Yes, I am updated about that.
Kate: Have you finished adding the internal server.
Admin: Yes, it should be serving the flag from now.
Kate: Also Don't forget to change the creds, plz stop using your username as password.
Kate: Hello.. ?
```

**Exploiting SSRF:**
We discover an internal service, `/internal/admin.php`, restricted to local access only. Additionally, we identify an `export2pdf` tool that redirects to a specified URL, encoded within the request. Using Burp Suite, we intercept and modify the URL from `http%3A%2F%2F127.0.0.1%2Fserver-info.php` to `/internal/admin.php` (you can do this on the inspector side of burpsuit and it'll encode it for you), effectively targeting the internal admin page.

**Success:**
This manipulation of the URL allows us to access the internal admin page, ultimately leading to the discovery of the flag.
