---
title: "3.1 Secure Protocols"
date: 2023-08-12 17:00:00 +500
categories: [Security+, Part III]
tags: []    # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

<style>
  p {
    text-align: justify;
  }
  </style>


# 3.1 Secure Protocols

## Protocols

In simple terms, protocols are like rules or languages that allow different components, devices, or systems to communicate with each other, regardless of who made them (independent of vendor). Just like we need a common language to understand each other, protocols provide a common set of rules and conventions for communication.

Protocols can have both secure and nonsecure versions. This means that some protocols have additional measures in place to protect the communication and data from unauthorized access or tampering, ensuring security during the transmission. These secure versions implement techniques like encryption, authentication, and data integrity checks to safeguard the information being exchanged.

### Domain Name System (DNS)

The Domain Name System (DNS) is a fundamental technology that helps translate human-readable domain names into numerical IP addresses, which are used by computers and devices to locate and communicate with each other on the internet. It acts like a phone book for the internet, making it easier for people to access websites and other online services.

Here's how the DNS works:

1. **User Input**: When you type a domain name (e.g., www.example.com) into your web browser's address bar, your device needs to find the IP address associated with that domain name so it can connect to the website.

2. **DNS Resolution Request**: Your device sends a DNS resolution request to a DNS resolver. This resolver could be provided by your Internet Service Provider (ISP), a third-party DNS service like Google DNS (8.8.8.8), or a local DNS server in a corporate network.

3. **Root DNS Servers**: If the DNS resolver doesn't have the IP address for the requested domain name cached (stored), it starts a query by contacting a root DNS server. There are a few root DNS servers distributed around the world.

4. **Top-Level Domain (TLD) Servers**: The root DNS server responds with a referral to the appropriate Top-Level Domain (TLD) server. The TLD is the part of the domain name right after the last dot (e.g., ".com," ".org," ".net").

5. **Authoritative DNS Servers**: The TLD server, in turn, refers the DNS resolver to the authoritative DNS server responsible for the specific domain name being queried. These authoritative DNS servers are maintained by domain registrars or organizations that own the domain.

6. **IP Address Retrieval**: The authoritative DNS server finally provides the IP address associated with the requested domain name to the DNS resolver.

7. **Response to User**: The DNS resolver caches this information for a period of time, known as the Time To Live (TTL), to speed up future requests for the same domain. It then returns the IP address to the user's device.

8. **Connection to the Website**: With the IP address in hand, your device can now establish a connection to the web server hosting the website associated with the domain name. This connection allows you to retrieve the web page and view it in your browser.

DNS is a crucial part of the internet's infrastructure, ensuring that you can access websites and services by using human-friendly domain names instead of having to remember complex IP addresses. It's a distributed and hierarchical system, which helps in scaling the internet efficiently and improving its reliability.

### Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC)

Domain Name System <u>Security Extensions</u> (DNS<u>SEC</u>) is a suite of extensions to the Domain Name System (DNS) protocol. Its primary purpose is to add an extra layer of security to the DNS infrastructure, making it more resistant to various types of attacks and ensuring the authenticity and integrity of DNS data.

However, the traditional DNS system lacks inherent security mechanisms, which makes it vulnerable to certain attacks, such as DNS cache poisoning, where attackers can manipulate the DNS data to redirect users to malicious websites. DNSSEC was introduced to address these security concerns and enhance the trustworthiness of DNS data.

Here's how DNSSEC works:

1. **Digital Signatures**: DNSSEC uses cryptographic digital signatures to sign DNS data. Each DNS record (such as A, AAAA, MX, etc.) is signed with a private key by the domain owner or the DNS administrator.

2. **Chain of Trust**: DNSSEC relies on a hierarchical chain of trust. The top-level domain (TLD) operators sign their zone data, and this chain of trust extends to the root zone. Subsequently, the trust cascades down to lower-level domains and their corresponding DNS records.

3. **DNSKEY and RRSIG Records**: DNSSEC introduces new DNS record types, such as DNSKEY and RRSIG records. DNSKEY records store the public keys used to verify signatures, while RRSIG records contain the digital signatures of the corresponding DNS data.

4. **Signature Validation**: When a user (such as a web browser) queries a DNS server for a domain's DNS information, the DNS server responds with the DNS data and accompanying signatures. The client then verifies the authenticity of the data by checking the signatures against the corresponding DNSKEY records up the chain of trust.

By implementing DNSSEC, the DNS infrastructure can provide additional assurance that the data received is legitimate and has not been tampered with during transmission. This helps prevent various DNS-based attacks, such as DNS cache poisoning, man-in-the-middle attacks, and DNS spoofing.


### SSH

*Secure Shell* (SSH), and it is a cryptographic network protocol used to establish secure and encrypted communication over an unsecured network. The primary purpose of SSH is to provide a secure way to access and manage network devices, servers, and computers remotely.

Here are the key features and functions of SSH:

1. **Secure Remote Access:** SSH allows users to log in and access remote systems securely over an insecure network (like the internet). It replaces older and less secure remote access methods like Telnet, which transmitted data in plain text, making it vulnerable to interception and unauthorized access.

2. **Authentication:** SSH uses public-key cryptography for user authentication. When connecting to a remote system, the client (user's computer) provides its public key to the server, and the server checks whether the corresponding private key is authorized to access the account. This provides a more secure and robust authentication mechanism than passwords alone.

3. **Encryption:** SSH encrypts all data transmitted between the client and the server, including login credentials and commands. This ensures that even if someone intercepts the data, they cannot decipher its contents without the encryption keys.

4. **Port Forwarding:** SSH supports port forwarding, which allows users to securely access services running on a remote server as if they were running on the local machine. This feature is useful for accessing services that are not directly exposed to the internet for security reasons.

5. **Secure File Transfer:** SSH can also be used for secure file transfer between systems using tools like SCP (Secure Copy) and SFTP (Secure File Transfer Protocol). These utilities allow users to securely copy files and directories between the local machine and a remote server.

6. **Tunneling:** SSH tunneling enables users to create encrypted tunnels between two endpoints. This can be used to secure communications between applications, bypass firewall restrictions, or access services on remote networks securely.

SSH is widely used in the IT industry, especially for system administration tasks, managing servers, and remotely accessing cloud-based virtual machines. It is considered a standard for secure remote access and has become an essential tool for system administrators, developers, and network engineers.

### Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME)

Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME) is a standard for securing email messages with encryption and digital signatures. It is an extension to the widely used MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) standard, which defines the format of email messages and attachments. S/MIME adds a layer of security to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity of email communications.

Key features of S/MIME include:

1. **Encryption:** Allows users to encrypt the content of email messages, so only the intended recipient with the appropriate private key can decrypt and read the message.

2. **Digital Signatures:** Enables digital signatures for email messages. When a sender signs an email with their private key, the recipient can use the sender's public key to verify the signature, ensuring its authenticity and integrity.

3. **Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) Integration:** Relies on a PKI, which is a system that manages the creation, distribution, and revocation of digital certificates. Digital certificates contain a user's public key and other identifying information, helping establish trust in the cryptographic operations used by S/MIME.

4. **Certificate Authorities (CAs):** Certificate Authorities are entities that issue digital certificates after verifying the identity of the certificate holder. They play a crucial role in ensuring the authenticity of digital signatures.

5. **Interoperability:** S/MIME is widely supported by popular email clients such as Microsoft Outlook, Apple Mail, and Thunderbird. This enables users to exchange secure email messages across different platforms and devices.

By using S/MIME, users can protect sensitive information in their emails, authenticate the identity of the sender, and ensure that messages remain unaltered during transmission. This is especially important in scenarios where email communication contains confidential data, financial information, or legal documentation.

### Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP)

Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP) is a security extension for the Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP), which is widely used for transmitting real-time multimedia data, such as audio and video streams, over IP networks. SRTP adds encryption, authentication, and integrity protection to RTP packets, making it a secure and confidential method for transmitting sensitive media content.

### Lightweight Directory Access Protocol over SSL (LDAPS)

Lightweight Directory Access Protocol over SSL (LDAPS) is a secure version of the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP). LDAP is a widely used protocol for accessing and managing directory information services, commonly used in enterprise environments for tasks like user authentication, authorization, and directory queries.

LDAPS adds an extra layer of security by securing the communication channel with SSL/TLS (Secure Sockets Layer/Transport Layer Security) encryption. This ensures that data exchanged between the LDAP client and the LDAP server remains encrypted and protected from eavesdropping and unauthorized access.

Here's how LDAPS works:

1. **LDAP Protocol:** LDAP is a protocol used to query and modify directory information. It operates over TCP/IP and is typically used on port 389 for unsecured connections.

2. **SSL/TLS Encryption:** LDAPS uses SSL/TLS encryption to secure the communication channel between the LDAP client and the LDAP server. SSL/TLS provides encryption, data integrity, and authentication, making LDAPS a secure way to transmit sensitive directory information.

3. **Port Number:** LDAPS operates on a different port than standard LDAP. By default, LDAPS uses port 636 for communication. When a client wants to establish a secure connection, it initiates the connection to port 636 on the LDAP server.

4. **Digital Certificates:** To establish an SSL/TLS connection, both the LDAP client and server must have valid digital certificates. These certificates are used for authentication and to establish a secure encrypted channel. The client verifies the server's certificate during the connection process.

LDAPS is commonly used in environments where security is a priority, such as in organizations, enterprises, and institutions handling sensitive user information. It provides a secure method for applications and services to interact with the directory services without compromising the confidentiality and integrity of the data being transmitted.

However, it's important to manage digital certificates properly to avoid potential security risks. Administrators must ensure that certificates are valid, not expired, and issued by trusted Certificate Authorities (CAs) to prevent man-in-the-middle attacks.

As a security best practice, LDAPS is preferred over unsecured LDAP whenever sensitive information is transmitted or when there's a need to ensure secure and encrypted communication between the LDAP client and server.

### File Transfer Protocol, Secure (FTPS)

It's a secure extension of the traditional FTP protocol used for transferring files between computers over a network, typically the internet. The key difference between FTP and FTPS is that FTPS adds a layer of security by incorporating the SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) or TLS (Transport Layer Security) protocols to encrypt the data being transferred.

FTPS can operate in two modes:

* **Implicit FTPS:** In this mode, the client connects to a specific port (990 by default) on the server, expecting an encrypted connection right from the start.

* **Explicit FTPS:** Here, the client connects to the standard FTP port (21) on the server and explicitly requests a secure connection by issuing specific commands.

### SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP)

Is a secure file transfer protocol that allows you to transfer files and manage remote files on a server over a secure encrypted connection. Despite its name, SFTP is not directly related to the traditional FTP (File Transfer Protocol); rather, it operates over the SSH (Secure Shell) protocol, utilizing its security features.


SFTP offers a secure means of transferring files through encrypted communication and authentication. It utilizes SSH key pairs or passwords to ensure authorized access for users. Operating on a single port (usually port 22), SFTP simplifies firewall configuration compared to traditional FTP. It provides various file management functions such as upload, download, rename, delete, and directory creation. Compatible with multiple platforms, SFTP supports advisory file locking, integrity checks, binary mode transfers for accuracy, and detailed error messages for effective troubleshooting.


### Simple Network Management Protocol, Version 3 (SNMPv3)

Is a widely used protocol for managing and monitoring network devices, systems, and infrastructure. It's an enhancement over earlier versions of SNMP (SNMPv1 and SNMPv2), addressing security and authentication concerns that were present in those versions. SNMP is commonly used to gather information about network devices, monitor their status, and manage their configurations remotely.


### Hypertext Transfer Protocol over SSL/TLS (HTTPS)

Is a secure version of the standard Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) used for transmitting data over the internet. HTTPS incorporates encryption and authentication mechanisms provided by the SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) or its successor, TLS (Transport Layer Security) protocols, to ensure the confidentiality and integrity of the data being exchanged between a user's browser and a website's server.

HTTPS is crucial for protecting sensitive information transmitted over the internet, such as login credentials, credit card details, personal information, and more. It is widely adopted by websites that handle user data, e-commerce platforms, online banking, social media, and any site where security and privacy are priorities. It helps create a safer and more secure online experience for both website owners and users.

### IPSec

IPsec, or Internet Protocol Security, is a suite of protocols and technologies used to secure communication and data transmission over Internet Protocol (IP) networks. It's designed to provide authentication, integrity, and confidentiality to IP packets, ensuring the security of network traffic.

Key components and features of IPsec include:

1. **Authentication Header (AH)**: AH provides authentication and integrity for IP packets. It ensures that the data hasn't been altered during transit and that the sender is genuine. However, AH does not provide confidentiality.

2. **Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP)**: ESP offers authentication, integrity, and confidentiality. It encrypts the payload of the IP packet to keep the data confidential in addition to providing authentication and integrity checks.

3. **Security Associations (SAs)**: SAs are established between two devices to define the parameters for secure communication, including encryption algorithms, authentication methods, and keys.

4. **Key Management**: IPsec requires the management of cryptographic keys for encryption and authentication. Key exchange protocols like IKE (Internet Key Exchange) are used to establish these keys securely.

5. **Transport Mode and Tunnel Mode**: IPsec can be implemented in two modes. In transport mode, only the payload of the original packet is encrypted and/or authenticated. In tunnel mode, the entire original packet, including its header, is encrypted and/or authenticated, and then encapsulated within a new IP packet.

6. **Network-Level Security**: IPsec operates at the network layer, ensuring that all traffic between two devices is secured, regardless of the applications or services running above the IP layer.

7. **VPN (Virtual Private Network)**: IPsec is often used to create secure VPN connections, allowing remote users or branch offices to connect to a corporate network securely over the internet.

8. **Site-to-Site and Remote Access**: IPsec can be used to establish secure connections between two networks (site-to-site) or between a remote user and a network (remote access).

9. **Compatibility**: IPsec is widely supported by various network devices and operating systems, making it a versatile solution for securing network traffic.

IPsec plays a critical role in ensuring the privacy and security of data transmitted over IP networks, making it an essential technology for organizations that need to protect their sensitive information from unauthorized access and interception. It's commonly used in VPNs, securing VoIP (Voice over IP) communications, remote access scenarios, and more.

### Post Office Protocol (POP) / Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)

Are two common protocols used for retrieving emails from a mail server to a client's email program. Both protocols allow users to access their emails, but they function differently in terms of how they handle email retrieval and management.

1. **Post Office Protocol (POP)**:
   POP is an older email retrieval protocol that downloads emails from the mail server to the client device. Here's how it works:
   
   - When a client requests emails using POP, the server sends the emails to the client, and the emails are removed from the server.
   - The client typically stores the downloaded emails locally, which can result in them being accessible from only one device.
   - Since emails are downloaded and removed from the server, accessing emails from multiple devices can be challenging. Changes made to emails on one device (like marking them as read or deleting them) might not be reflected on other devices.

2. **Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP)**:
   IMAP is a more modern email protocol that offers richer functionality for managing emails across multiple devices. Here's how it works:
   
   - With IMAP, emails are stored on the mail server, and the client device maintains a synchronized view of the emails.
   - When a user accesses an email using IMAP, the email is fetched from the server and displayed on the client. However, the email remains on the server.
   - IMAP supports folder structures on the server, allowing users to organize emails into different folders. Changes made to email status (read/unread, deleted) are synchronized across all devices.
   - IMAP is better suited for users who access their emails from multiple devices or who want to keep their emails centrally managed on the server.

In summary, POP is a simpler protocol that downloads emails to a single device and removes them from the server, while IMAP maintains emails on the server and offers synchronization across multiple devices. IMAP is generally recommended for users who want better control and flexibility over their emails, especially when accessing them from different devices. However, POP can still be useful in situations where users want to keep local copies of emails and have limited storage on the server.

## Use Cases


### Voice and Video

Voice and video content usually involve streaming media and have their own protocols to encode the data streams. To make sure this content is securely transferred, you can use the Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP). SRTP is specifically designed to securely send audio and video over IP networks.

### Time Synchronization

Time Synchronization ensures that devices share the same time. Network Time Protocol (NTP) is used for this. NTP works through UDP port 123. While NTP lacks protection from man-in-the-middle attacks, adding extra security directly or through out-of-band checks is not common practice.

### E-mail and Web

Email and the Web are plaintext systems. HTTPS secures web connections with SSL/TLS. While SSL is no longer secure, for email, S/MIME is recommended for security.

### File Transfer

Secure file transfer is important for confidentiality and integrity. FTP is insecure, but SFTP and FTPS are secure options.

### Directory Services

Directory services mainly use LDAP. LDAPS is often used for security. These services handle logon information behind the scenes.

### Remote Access

Remote access lets users access resources on a network. SSL/TLS secure authentication and data access. SSH is secure for networking devices, while VPN and IPSec are used for servers and computers.

### Domain Name Resolution

DNS performs domain name resolution. Secure DNS (DNSSEC) isn't widely deployed yet. TCP and UDP port 53 are used, with TCP port 53 needing firewall protection.

### Routing and Switching

Routing and switching are key functions. SNMPv3 manages networking data. SSH is more secure than Telnet.

### Network Address Allocation

Address allocation uses SNMPv3 to manage data flow. IP addresses can be static or via DHCP. Proper allocation is vital for network performance.

### Subscription Services

Subscription services manage data flow based on a push or pull model. LDAP helps manage needed data elements. Software as a Service (SaaS) works on a subscription basis, with software hosted centrally, often in the cloud.



## Chapter Review


1. **Protocols**

    * **Domain Name System (DNS):** Translates domain names into IP addresses.

    * **Domain Name System Security Extensions (DNSSEC):** Enhances DNS security by adding protection against attacks and ensuring authentic and reliable DNS data.

    * **Secure Shell (SSH):** Provides secure remote access, authentication, encryption, and secure file transfers over networks.

    * **Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (S/MIME):** Adds encryption and digital signatures to email messages for confidentiality and authenticity.

    * **Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP):** Securely transmits audio and video over IP networks using encryption and authentication.

    * **Lightweight Directory Access Protocol over SSL (LDAPS):** A secure version of LDAP, protecting directory access with SSL/TLS encryption.

    * **File Transfer Protocol, Secure (FTPS):** Secure version of FTP, adding encryption using SSL/TLS for secure file transfers.

    * **SSH File Transfer Protocol (SFTP):** Securely transfers and manages files using SSH for encryption and authentication.

    * **Simple Network Management Protocol, Version 3 (SNMPv3):** Manages network devices securely, addressing security concerns in earlier versions.

    * **Hypertext Transfer Protocol over SSL/TLS (HTTPS):** Secures web communication with encryption and authentication using SSL/TLS.

    * **Internet Protocol Security (IPSec):** Secures IP network traffic with authentication, encryption, and integrity checks.

        * **Authentication header (AH)/Encapsulating Security Payloads (ESP):** AH provides authentication, and ESP adds encryption in IPSec.

        * **Tunnel/transport:** Tunnel encrypts the entire packet, while transport encrypts only the payload in IPSec.

    * **Post Office Protocol / Internet Message Access Protocol (POP/IMAP):** Protocols for retrieving email; POP downloads emails, while IMAP synchronizes them across devices.

2. **Use Cases**

    * **Voice and Video:** Securely transmit audio and video content over IP networks using SRTP.

    * **Time Synchronization:** Achieve synchronized time across devices using NTP, while considering potential security risks.

    * **E-mail and Web:** Use HTTPS for secure web connections and consider S/MIME for securing email.

    * **File Transfer:** Securely transfer files using SFTP or FTPS for confidentiality and integrity.

    * **Directory Services:** Use secure LDAP or LDAPS for managing directory information and logon data.

    * **Remote Access:** Securely access networks and systems remotely using VPN, IPSec, or SSH.

    * **Domain Name Resolution:** Ensure secure DNS operations and protect against attacks using DNSSEC.

    * **Routing and Switching:** Manage network devices and data with SNMPv3 and prioritize SSH over Telnet.

    * **Network Address Allocation:** Manage IP address allocation using SNMPv3, DHCP, and proper design.

    * **Subscription Services:** Manage data flows using LDAP and adopt subscription models like SaaS for software access.

